>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JANUARY 24: ISIS
EXECUTES A JAPANESE PRISONER IT
WAS HOLDING IN SYRIA; UNREST IN
YEMEN DEALS A BLOW TO AMERICAN
COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS IN THE
REGION; THE FIGHTING IN UKRAINE
INTENSIFIES-- WHAT IS RUSSIA'S
ROLE?
WE'LL HEAR FROM A "NEW YORK
TIMES" REPORTER THERE.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
UNABLE TO FIND WORK AND BEING
FORCED INTO POVERTY BECAUSE OF A
CRIMINAL RECORD.
>> I DID MY PROBATION.
NO VIOLATIONS.
MODEL CITIZEN.
EVERY TIME I APPLY FOR A JOB, I
FEEL LIKE I'M COMMITTING A CRIME
ALL OVER AGAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ISIS HAS EXECUTED ONE OF THE TWO
JAPANESE HOSTAGES IT WAS HOLDING
IN SYRIA.
IMAGES RELEASED ONLINE TODAY BY
THE ISLAMIC EXTREMIST GROUP
PURPORTEDLY SHOW THE BEHEADING
OF HARUNA YUKAWA, A 42-YEAR-OLD
UNEMPLOYED MAN WHO WENT TO SYRIA
IN JULY AND WAS CAPTURED THE
NEXT MONTH.
THE JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER,
SHINZO ABE, CALLED THE
EXECUTION "AN OUTRAGEOUS AND
UNFORGIVABLE ACT."
ISIS IS THREATENING TO KILL THE
SECOND JAPANESE HOSTAGE, KENJI
GOTO, A 47-YEAR-OLD JOURNALIST,
UNLESS JORDANIAN AUTHORITIES
RELEASE A WOMAN SENTENCED TO
DEATH FOR HER PART IN HOTEL
BOMBINGS THERE IN 2005.
ISIS HAD PREVIOUSLY DEMANDED
THAT A $200 MILLION RANSOM BE
PAID.
FOLLOWING THE COLLAPSE OF THE
GOVERNMENT IN YEMEN, EFFORTS BY
THE C.I.A. AND THE U.S. JOINT
SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND TO
COMBAT TERRORISM REPORTEDLY HAVE
SUFFERED A SETBACK.
THE "WASHINGTON POST" REPORTS
THAT THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
HAS BEEN FORCED TO SUSPEND
CERTAIN OPERATIONS BECAUSE OF
LOSSES SUFFERED BY GOVERNMENT
FORCES THERE.
THOSE FORCES HELPED AMERICAN
DRONES TARGET EXTREMISTS.
YOU'LL RECALL THAT THE RECENT
TERROR ATTACKS IN PARIS WERE
ORGANIZED BY AL QAEDA IN THE
ARABIAN PENINSULA, WHICH IS
BASED IN SOUTHERN YEMEN.
SPAIN TODAY ANNOUNCED THE ARREST
OF FOUR TERROR SUSPECTS.
AUTHORITIES DESCRIBED THEM AS
"HIGHLY RADICALIZED AND HIGHLY
TRAINED."
THE TWO PAIRS OF BROTHERS WERE
TAKEN INTO CUSTODY IN THE
SPANISH TERRITORY OF SAYOTA,
WHICH BORDERS MOROCCO.
A POLICE OFFICIAL SAID THEY WERE
OF MOROCCAN ORIGIN BUT HELD
SPANISH CITIZENSHIP.
HE SAID THERE WERE MANY
PARALLELS WITH THE BROTHERS WHO
ATTACKED THE OFFICES OF THE
FRENCH SATIRIC NEWSPAPER
"CHARLIE HEBDO."
A 19-YEAR-OLD FROM A DENVER
SUBURB HAS BEEN SENTENCED TO
FOUR YEARS IN PRISON AFTER
PLEADING GUILTY TO CHARGES THAT
SHE TRIED TO HELP ISIS.
SHANNON CONLEY WAS ARRESTED IN
APRIL WHILE TRYING TO BOARD A
PLANE FOR TURKEY.
SHE HAD PLANNED TO CONTINUE ON
TO SYRIA TO MARRY A FIGHTER
THERE WHOM SHE HAD MET ONLINE.
THE JUDGE, WHO IMPOSED THE
SENTENCE, SAID IT WAS MEANT TO
DETER OTHERS FROM TRYING TO AID
THE TERROR GROUP.
THE PRESIDENT AND FIRST LADY
LEFT TODAY ON AN OFFICIAL VISIT
TO INDIA.
EVEN BEFORE THEY DEPARTED, THE
WHITE HOUSE ANNOUNCED THAT THE
TRIP WOULD BE CUT SHORT SO THAT
THE PRESIDENT CAN VISIT SAUDI
ARABIA ON THE WAY BACK, TO PAY
HIS RESPECTS AND OFFER
CONDOLENCES TO THE FAMILY OF THE
LATE KING ABDULLAH AND TO MEET
WITH HIS SUCCESSOR.
IN UKRAINE, AT LEAST 29 PEOPLE
WERE KILLED AND ALMOST 100
OTHERS WOUNDED AFTER A BARRAGE
OF ROCKETS FIRED BY PRO-RUSSIAN
REBELS HIT A CROWDED OPEN-AIR
MARKET AT A NEARBY
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THE INCIDENT OCCURRED IN THE
PORT CITY OF MARIUPOL, NEAR
CRIMEA.
THAT'S THE AREA RUSSIA FORCIBLY
ANNEXED LAST SPRING.
FIGHTING INTENSIFIED THIS WEEK
AND THE REBELS ANNOUNCED A NEW
OFFENSIVE EVEN THOUGH A CEASE-
FIRE WAS ANNOUNCED LAST
SEPTEMBER.
THE FIGHTING IN EASTERN UKRAINE
NEAR RUSSIA HAS CLAIMED MORE
THAN 5,000 LIVES.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THE
ESCALATING CONFLICT THERE
LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
GAS PRICES CONTINUE TO PLUMMET.
THE A.A.A. REPORTS THAT GAS IS
NOW BEING SOLD FOR UNDER $2 A
GALLON AT ABOUT 60% OF GAS
STATIONS ACROSS THE UNITED
STATES.
THE AVERAGE PRICE IS ABOUT
$2.04.
THAT'S THE LEAST EXPENSIVE IT
HAS BEEN IN SIX YEARS.
THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
PREDICTED LAST WEEK THAT THE
AVERAGE AMERICAN HOUSEHOLD WILL
SPEND ABOUT $750 LESS ON GAS
THIS YEAR COMPARED TO LAST.
TWO MARINES HAVE BEEN KILLED IN
A HELICOPTER CRASH DURING A
MILITARY TRAINING EXERCISE.
THE INCIDENT OCCURRED LATE
YESTERDAY AFTERNOON AT THE BASE
IN TWENTYNINE PALMS CALIFORNIA,
ABOUT 120 MILES EAST OF LOS
ANGELES.
AUTHORITIES ARE INVESTIGATING
THE CAUSE OF THE CRASH.
PEGGY CHARREN HAS DIED.
HER DECADES OF ACTIVISM LED TO
PASSAGE OF A FEDERAL LAW
REQUIRING TV STATIONS TO AIR
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMMING FOR
CHILDREN.
SHE SAID HER CAMPAIGN HAD BEEN
INSPIRED BY WATCHING WHAT SHE
DESCRIBED AS "WALL-TO-WALL
MONSTER CARTOONS" WITH HER
DAUGHTER.
THE GROUP SHE FOUNDED, ACTION
FOR CHILDREN'S TELEVISION, IS
ALSO CREDITED WITH GETTING
BROADCAST NETWORKS TO CUT
ADVERTISING TIME ON SATURDAY
MORNING PROGRAMMING AND TO HALT
THE ADVERTISING OF SUGAR-COATED
VITAMINS FOR KIDS.
AND ERNIE BANKS, AFFECTIONATELY
KNOWN AS "MR. CUB," HAS DIED.
THE HALL-OF-FAME, POWER-HITTING
SHORTSTOP BECAME THE FIRST
AFRICAN-AMERICAN MEMBER OF THE
TEAM IN THE FALL OF 1953.
HE WENT ON TO HIT 512 HOME RUNS,
WAS A TWO-TIME NATIONAL LEAGUE
M.V.P. AND PLAYED IN 14 ALL-STAR
GAMES.
IN 2013, PRESIDENT OBAMA
PRESENTED ERNIE BANKS WITH THE
PRESIDENTIAL MEDAL OF FREEDOM,
CITING HIS GOOD CHEER, HIS
OPTIMISM AND HIS ETERNAL FAITH
THAT SOMEDAY THE CUBS WOULD GO
ALL THE WAY.
THE TEAM LAST WON THE WORLD
SERIES IN 1908.
HE IS ALSO REMEMBERED FOR HIS
SIGNATURE EXPRESSION, "LET'S
PLAY 2," A COMMENT HE REPORTEDLY
FIRST UTTERED ON A 105-DEGREE
DAY IN CHICAGO.
ERNIE BANKS WAS 83 YEARS OLD.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
TODAY'S BEHEADING OF ONE
JAPANESE HOSTAGE AND JAPAN'S
EFFORTS TO FREE THE SECOND, WE
ARE JOINED NOW BY HAJIME OZAKI.
HE IS THE NEW YORK BUREAU CHIEF
OF THE KYODO NEWS AGENCY.
SO, WHAT STEPS DID THE JAPANESE
GOVERNMENT TAKE TO TRY AND FREE
THIS PARTICULAR HOSTAGE, OR WHAT
ARE THEY STILL DOING TO TRY TO
GET THE NEXT ONE?
>> I BELIEVE THAT THE JAPANESE
GOVERNMENT IS TRYING ALL ITS
EFFORT TO RELEASE MR. KENJI
GOTO, THE SECOND HOSTAGE,
THROUGH VARIOUS CHANNELS,
INCLUDING NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES
TO ISIS, NAMELY JORDAN AND SO
ON.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE'S BEEN
SOME CONCERN THAT THIS IS IN
RETALIATION TO THE PRIME
MINISTER'S VISIT TO THE MIDDLE
EAST REGION PLEDGING ANOTHER
$200 MILLION FOR COUNTERMEASURES
AGAINST ISIL, BUT ALSO
HUMANITARIAN SUPPORT.
>> CORRECT.
PRIME MINISTER ABE LAST WEEK
VISITED CAIRO AND ISSUED THAT
STATEMENT THAT THE JAPANESE
GOVERNMENT IS TRYING TO HELP THE
REFUGEES AND NEIGHBORING
COUNTRIES TO ISIS... WHICH ARE
FIGHTING WITH THE THREAT OF
ISIS.
APPARENTLY, ISIS SEIZED THE
MOMENT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
ABE'S STATEMENT, AND THE RANSOM
THAT THEY DEMANDED COINCIDES
WITH THE AMOUNT OF THE MONEY
THAT PRIME MINISTER ABE PLEDGED
TO HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, IS THERE
ANY CHANCE THAT JAPAN WOULD PAY
THE RANSOM?
I MEAN, BACK IN THE LATE '70s,
THERE WAS AN INCIDENT IN
BANGLADESH AND THERE WAS SOME
QUESTION ABOUT AN INCIDENT IN
THE LATE '90s IN KYRGYZSTAN.
IS THERE AN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT
POLICY THAT SAID THEY WOULDN'T
PAY?
>> THE OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT
POLICY IS TO COMPLY WITH THE
KIND OF INTERNATIONAL NORM, NOT
TO BEND TO THE THREAT OF THE
TERRORISTS.
SO, IT IS UNDERSTOOD THAT THE
JAPANESE GOVERNMENT IS NOT READY
TO PAY THE RANSOM.
BUT EVERYTHING MAY BE POSSIBLE.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, NOW ISIS
CHANGED THEIR DEMAND FROM THE
RANSOM TO THE RELEASE OF THE
HOSTAGE TAKEN IN JORDAN.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT HAS
THE REACTION BEEN IN JAPAN OVER
THE PAST FEW DAYS?
OBVIOUSLY, THIS NEWS BROKE SO
LATE AT NIGHT THAT MOST JAPANESE
WERE ASLEEP, AND THEY WON'T KNOW
UNTIL TOMORROW MORNING, AND THAT
WILL BE THE REACTION TO THIS
HOSTAGE'S ASSASSINATION.
BUT OVER THE PAST SEVERAL DAYS,
AS THIS STORY HAS BEEN BUILDING
IN JAPAN, WHAT'S IT BEEN LIKE?
>> YES, OF COURSE, MOST OF THE
JAPANESE POPULATION ARE VERY
MUCH CONCERNED AND WORRIED ABOUT
THE FATE OF THE TWO HOSTAGES,
AND THERE WAS A PRESS CONFERENCE
BY ONE OF THE... MOTHER OF ONE
OF THE HOSTAGES THE OTHER DAY,
AND IT... HER APPEAL TO FREE
THE... FREE HER SON WAS WIDELY
APPRECIATED, AND A LOT OF
COMPASSION GROWN IN JAPANESE
SOCIETY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
>> ON THE OTHER HAND, THERE ARE
SOME SENTIMENTS IN CERTAIN
PEOPLE IN JAPAN THAT THE GUYS
WENT TO SYRIA KNOWING THAT THERE
ARE RISKS.
AND THERE ARE SOME VOICES THAT
BLAME THE BEHAVIOR...
>> Sreenivasan: THAT THEY
ENGAGED IN RISKY BEHAVIOR.
>> RIGHT, CORRECT.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, HAJIME
OZAKI, THE NEW YORK BUREAU CHIEF
OF THE KYODO NEWS AGENCY, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
TONIGHT, THE DEBATE ABOUT
EMPLOYER BACKGROUND CHECKS.
HOW FAR BACK SHOULD THEY GO?
IT'S MORE THAN A PERSONAL ISSUE
BECAUSE A GROWING BODY OF
EVIDENCE SUGGESTS THAT ANYONE
WITH A CRIMINAL RECORD, EVEN FOR
A MINOR OFFENSE COMMITTED LONG
AGO, IS MUCH MORE LIKELY TO LIVE
IN POVERTY.
AND TENS OF MILLIONS OF
AMERICANS HAVE SOME SORT OF
CRIMINAL RECORD.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
RECENTLY TRAVELED TO
PHILADELPHIA AND HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: EVERY AFTERNOON, AT
HIS DINING ROOM TABLE, 35-YEAR-
OLD RONALD LEWIS DOES HIS
HOMEWORK.
BY DAY, HE'S A STUDENT, LEARNING
TO FIX HEATING AND AIR
CONDITIONING SYSTEMS, AND HE
LOOKS AFTER HIS THREE KIDS.
HE ALSO WORKS THE NIGHTSHIFT,
RUNNING HIGH-PRESSURE BOILERS AT
A CHEMICAL PLANT HERE IN HIS
HOMETOWN, PHILADELPHIA.
>> I'M A FATHER.
I'M A HARD WORKER.
I'M VERY AMBITIOUS.
>> Reporter: HE'S ALSO GOT A
CRIMINAL RECORD.
A DECADE AGO, LEWIS HAD TWO
MAJOR RUN-INS WITH THE LAW THAT
HE SAYS HAVE INTERFERED WITH HIS
JOB PROSPECTS EVER SINCE.
IN AUGUST 2004, HE WAS PICKED UP
DURING A DRUG ARREST ALONGSIDE
HIS BROTHER.
LEWIS WAS CARRYING A NINE-
MILLIMETER HANDGUN.
DAYS LATER, HE WAS NABBED FOR
STEALING A POCKETBOOK FROM A
DEPARTMENT STORE.
SO, WHAT WAS THAT LIKE, AND WHAT
HAPPENED AT THAT STAGE AFTER
THEY ARRESTED YOU?
>> IT WAS LIFE CHANGING.
IT WASN'T A GOOD FEELING.
IT WASN'T A GOOD FEELING BECAUSE
YOU FELT LIKE YOU DISAPPOINTED
YOUR FAMILY AND YOU DISAPPOINTED
YOUR MOTHER, WHICH IS THE MOST
IMPORTANT PERSON IN MY LIFE.
>> Reporter: ON THE SUGGESTION
OF HIS LAWYER, LEWIS TOOK A
DEAL.
FOR BOTH CASES, HE PLED GUILTY
TO A TOTAL OF THREE MISDEMEANORS
AND WAS SENTENCED TO FIVE YEARS
PROBATION.
NO JAIL TIME.
AT THAT TIME, WERE YOU WORRIED
AT ALL ABOUT HOW THIS MIGHT
IMPACT YOUR FUTURE?
>> NO, BECAUSE THE LAWYER HAD
TOLD ME, "IT'S ONLY A
MISDEMEANOR.
IT'S NEVER GOING TO HURT YOU.
DON'T EVEN WORRY ABOUT IT."
SO, NO, I REALLY DIDN'T THINK
THAT MUCH INTO IT AT THAT POINT.
>> Reporter: A SHORT TIME LATER,
LEWIS BEGAN LOOKING FOR NEW
WORK.
HE WAS OVERJOYED WHEN HE GOT A
TENTATIVE JOB OFFER FROM A
BUILDING COMPANY.
>> I WORKED THERE FOR ABOUT A
MONTH, WAS HONEST WITH THEM.
TOLD THEM, YOU KNOW, WHAT WAS ON
MY RECORD.
THEY STILL HIRED ME.
WE'RE WORKING.
SO, I WORK THERE ABOUT A MONTH.
THEY CALLED ME IN THE OFFICE AND
SAID, "YOUR RECORD CAME BACK.
WE'VE GOT TO LET YOU GO."
>> Reporter: AND THAT WAS IT?
EVEN THOUGH YOU HAD DISCLOSED
EVERYTHING?
YOU WERE NEVER DISHONEST IN THE
HIRING PROCESS?
>> NEVER DISHONEST, NEVER.
THEY LOOKED SO SCARED OF ME, IT
WAS A SHAME.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU MEAN?
>> WHEN THEY... "WE GOT TO GET
YOU OUT OF HERE.
WE'VE GOT TO GET YOU OFF THE
PREMISES."
>> Reporter: LEWIS SAYS THAT
SCENARIO PLAYED OUT OVER AND
OVER AGAIN.
LATER ON, HE HAD TWO OFFERS THAT
WERE THEN REVOKED.
HE HAD PROMISING PHONE CALLS
WITH ANOTHER COMPANY THAT WENT
NOWHERE.
HE SAYS THE ONLY EXPLANATION HE
RECEIVED: THE EXISTENCE OF
CRIMES IN HIS PAST.
FOUR OF THOSE COMPANIES DECLINED
TO DISCUSS LEWIS' CASE WITH US.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING
TO WATCH THIS, AND THEY'RE GOING
TO SAY, "YOU KNOW WHAT?
YOU WEREN'T A KID.
YOU WERE 25.
YOU WERE AN ADULT.
YOU KNEW WHAT YOU WERE DOING.
AND THAT THIS IS A CONSEQUENCE.
THIS IS A CONSEQUENCE OF YOUR
ACTIONS."
>> IF YOU SHOW ME ONE PERSON
THAT HASN'T MADE A MISTAKE, THEN
I WON'T APPLY NOWHERE ELSE.
>> Reporter: NINE IN TEN
COMPANIES IN THE U.S. CONDUCT
BACKGROUND CHECKS, AND WITH RAP
SHEETS WIDELY AVAILABLE ONLINE,
ADVOCATES SAY PEOPLE WITH
CRIMINAL BACKGROUNDS, SOMETIMES
JUST AN ARREST RECORD, NO
CONVICTION, ARE BEING BLOCKED
FROM EMPLOYMENT.
THEY SAY IT'S DRIVING A GROWING
NUMBER OF PEOPLE INTO POVERTY
AND THAT RONALD LEWIS' CASE IS
HARDLY UNIQUE.
>> IT'S VERY COMMON.
WE SEE CLIENTS COME IN WITH
VARIATIONS OF HIS STORY ON A
DAILY BASIS.
>> Reporter: SHARON DIETRICH IS
NOW RONALD LEWIS' LAWYER.
SHE DIDN'T REPRESENT HIM IN THE
ORIGINAL CRIMINAL CASES.
SHE'S ALSO THE LITIGATION
DIRECTOR AT COMMUNITY LEGAL
SERVICES OF PHILADELPHIA.
SHE'S BEEN THERE FOR NEARLY
30 YEARS.
>> WE SERVE THE LOW-INCOME
COMMUNITY OF PHILADELPHIA,
BASICALLY UNEMPLOYED AND LOW-
WAGE WORKERS IN PHILADELPHIA.
AND IT'S THE SINGLE MOST COMMON
REASON PEOPLE COME TO US FOR
HELP IS BECAUSE THEY HAVE A
CRIMINAL RECORD THAT HAS BEEN
KEEPING THEM FROM GETTING A JOB.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL," USING
DATA FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF
SOUTH CAROLINA, REPORTED THAT
AMERICANS WITH A CRIMINAL
CONVICTION BY AGE 23 HAVE HIGHER
UNEMPLOYMENT RATES, MAKE LESS
MONEY AND ARE TWICE AS LIKELY TO
END UP IN POVERTY AS THEIR
PEERS.
>> THE REALITY IS THAT WITH THE
RISE OF TECHNOLOGY AND REALLY
WITH THE PROLIFERATION OF
BACKGROUND CHECKS IN THIS NATION
IN REALLY EVERY WALK OF LIFE
FROM EMPLOYMENT TO HOUSING, A
CRIMINAL RECORD NOW CARRIES
OFTEN LIFELONG BARRIERS TO BASIC
BUILDING BLOCKS OF ECONOMIC
SECURITY.
>> Reporter: REBECCA VALLAS IS A
LAWYER AND POVERTY EXPERT AT THE
LEFT-LEANING CENTER FOR AMERICAN
PROGRESS IN WASHINGTON.
SHE AND SHARON DIETRICH, RONALD
LEWIS' LAWYER, PUBLISHED A
REPORT LAST YEAR LINKING POVERTY
AND CRIMINAL BACKGROUNDS,
ESPECIALLY AMONG BLACK MEN.
>> THE FACT IS THAT BETWEEN 70
MILLION AND 100 MILLION
AMERICANS-- AND THAT'S NEARLY
ONE IN THREE OF US-- HAS SOME
TYPE OF CRIMINAL RECORD.
AND SO IT'S REALLY AN INCREDIBLY
PERVASIVE PROBLEM THAT IMPACTS
WHOLE SEGMENTS OF OUR COMMUNITY.
BUT IT... THIS ISSUE ALSO REALLY
DISPROPORTIONATELY IMPACTS
COMMUNITIES OF COLOR.
>> Reporter: EMPLOYERS SAY THEY
AREN'T JUST SHUTTING OUT
EVERYONE WITH A CRIMINAL PAST;
THEY'RE BEING CAREFUL AND
COMPLYING WITH GUIDELINES FROM
THE FEDERAL EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION, MEANT TO
GIVE PEOPLE SECOND CHANCES.
THAT'S ACCORDING TO BETH MILITO
AT THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF
INDEPENDENT BUSINESSES, WHICH
REPRESENTS 350,000 SMALL
COMPANIES.
A CYNICAL PART OF ME SAYS, "HEY,
IF I SAT DOWN AND, BOY, IT LOOKS
LIKE SOMEONE'S GOT A CRIMINAL
RECORD AND THEN I'VE GOT ANOTHER
CANDIDATE WHO DOESN'T, I'M GOING
TO GO WITH THE GUY WHO DOESN'T
HAVE THE CRIMINAL RECORD,"
RIGHT?
>> MAYBE, MAYBE NOT.
I THINK IT DEPENDS ON THE NATURE
OF THE JOB.
THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION ISSUED NEW GUIDANCE
IN APRIL OF 2012, AND IT
REITERATES THAT WHERE AT ALL
POSSIBLE IT'S GOOD FOR A
BUSINESS TO CONSIDER THREE
FACTORS: THE NATURE OF THE
CRIME; THE TIME THAT'S ELAPSED
SINCE THE CRIME; AND THE NATURE
OF THE JOB.
AND, WHEN AT ALL POSSIBLE, TO
MAKE AN INDIVIDUALIZED
ASSESSMENT.
AND I THINK MANY EMPLOYERS WILL
DO THAT.
>> Reporter: DOZENS OF CITIES,
INCLUDING PHILADELPHIA, ALONG
WITH THIRTEEN STATES, HAVE
PASSED SO-CALLED BAN THE BOX
MEASURES THAT BASICALLY BAN THAT
LITTLE CHECK BOX ON JOB
APPLICATIONS ASKING ABOUT YOUR
CRIMINAL HISTORY.
BUT VALLAS AND DIETRICH'S REPORT
FOR THE CENTER FOR AMERICAN
PROGRESS WANTS TO GO A STEP
FURTHER AND SEAL LOW-LEVEL,
NONVIOLENT CRIMINAL OFFENSES
THAT TOOK PLACE MORE THAN TEN
YEARS AGO.
ACCORDING TO REBECCA VALLAS, THE
DATA SHOW THAT AFTER A DECADE,
NONVIOLENT OFFENDERS ARE NO MORE
LIKELY TO COMMIT A CRIME THAN
ANYONE ELSE, SO THEIR RECORDS
SHOULDN'T BE PART OF THE HIRING
PROCESS AT ALL.
>> WE REALLY HAVE POLICIES IN
PLACE THAT TREAT A PERSON AS A
CRIMINAL LONG AFTER THEY REALLY
POSE ANY SIGNIFICANT RISK OF
EVER RE-OFFENDING.
AND IT REALLY DOESN'T MAKE MUCH
SENSE TO BE SHUTTING SOMEONE OUT
OF OPPORTUNITIES TO ACCESS A
JOB, FOR INSTANCE, BECAUSE OF
MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT WHO THAT
PERSON MIGHT BE AND THE RISK
THAT THEY MIGHT POSE TO PUBLIC
SAFETY.
>> Reporter: BUT BETH MILITO AT
THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF
INDEPENDENT BUSINESSES SAYS
EMPLOYERS FACE MAJOR RISKS AND
EVEN POTENTIAL NEGLIGENT HIRING
LAWSUITS IF A PAST OFFENDER
COMMITS A CRIME ON THE JOB.
AND FOR SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS
ESPECIALLY, THEIR REPUTATIONS
COULD BE ON THE LINE.
>> HIRING DECISIONS ARE
CHALLENGING, AND THEY NEED THIS
INFORMATION.
THEY CAN'T TURN A BLIND EYE.
TOO MUCH IS AT RISK.
THEY CAN'T TURN A BLIND EYE TO
CRIMINAL HISTORY.
IT'D BE FOOLISH TO.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S PEOPLE,
PROPERTY AT STAKE.
>> Reporter: SOMEONE MIGHT BE
WATCHING THIS, AND THEY SAY,
"YOU KNOW WHAT?
I WOULDN'T TRUST YOU AT MY
BUSINESS."
HOW DO YOU DEFEND YOURSELF TO
THAT CHARGE?
>> WHAT I SAY TO THEM IS, IT WAS
2004, AND I'M PRETTY SURE IF YOU
MADE A MISTAKE IN 2004-- YOU
DON'T KNOW WHAT YOUR MISTAKE
WAS BUT MINE IS DOCUMENTED, SO
YOU KNOW WHAT MY MISTAKE IS.
AND LOOK AT THE POSITIVE THINGS
I'VE DONE SINCE 2004.
SO, IF YOU'RE GOING TO HANG YOUR
HAT ON JUST 2004, THEN YOU
PROBABLY AREN'T THE PERSON I
WANT TO WORK FOR ANYWAY.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK AN
EMPLOYER DOESN'T HAVE THE RIGHT
TO KNOW WHAT HAPPENED IN YOUR
PAST?
>> EMPLOYERS SHOULD KNOW,
SHOULD KNOW WHO THEY'RE HIRING.
IT'S FAIR.
YOU... YOU SHOULD KNOW.
BUT YOU SHOULD ALSO REMEMBER
THAT THESE ARE LIVES WE'RE...
THESE ARE PEOPLE'S LIVES WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
IT'S LIKE IF ALMOST DOUBLE
JEOPARDY.
JUST LOOK AT IT LIKE THIS.
I SERVED MY... I DID MY
PROBATION.
NO VIOLATIONS.
MODEL CITIZEN.
I GO TO SCHOOL AND TRY TO BETTER
MYSELF.
AND I'M... IT'S LIKE EVERY TIME
I APPLY FOR A JOB, I FEEL LIKE
I'M COMMITTING A CRIME ALL OVER
AGAIN.
>> Reporter: LEWIS HAS SUBMITTED
TWO PARDON APPLICATIONS TO THE
STATE TO CLEAR HIS RECORD, AND
WHILE BOTH HAVE BEEN REJECTED,
HE PLANS ON RESUBMITTING IN THE
NEAR FUTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: SHOULD EMPLOYERS
DOING BACKGROUND CHECKS BE
BLOCKED FROM SEEING NON-VIOLENT
CRIMINAL OFFENSES?
TAKE OUR POLL AND SHARE YOUR
VIEWS AT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT SHELLING
ATTACK THAT KILLED DOZENS OF
PEOPLE TODAY IN EASTERN UKRAINE
WAS ONLY THE LATEST SIGN OF THE
DETERIORATING SITUATION THERE.
EVEN THOUGH A CEASE-FIRE WAS
SIGNED IN SEPTEMBER, FIGHTING
BETWEEN PRO-RUSSIAN REBELS AND
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT TROOPS ONCE
AGAIN HAS INTENSIFIED.
AND YESTERDAY, THE REBELS
LAUNCHED A NEW OFFENSIVE.
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED VIA
SKYPE BY ANDREW KRAMER OF THE
"NEW YORK TIMES."
HE'S REPORTING TONIGHT FROM THE
REGIONAL CAPITAL OF DONETSK.
SO, ANDREW, FOR MOST AMERICANS,
WE THOUGHT THIS WAS A CONFLICT
THAT WAS SOMEWHAT RESOLVED.
THERE WAS A POOR CEASE-FIRE, BUT
IT WAS OVER.
BUT FOR THE PAST WEEK, YOU HAVE
BEEN TALKING ABOUT AND REPORTING
ON A WAR ON MULTIPLE FRONTS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME ON THE
SHOW.
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM SEEMED TO
HOLD THAT THE ECONOMIC CRISIS
IN RUSSIA WOULD ENCOURAGE THE
RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT TO TAKE A
SOFTER LINE IN EASTERN UKRAINE,
BUT WHAT WE'VE SEEN IN THE LAST
WEEK IS QUITE THE OPPOSITE.
NOW, RUSSIA, OF COURSE, FORMALLY
DOES NOT SUPPORT THE SEPARATIST
MOVEMENT HERE MILITARILY.
NONETHELESS, WE SEE STATEMENTS
OF SUPPORT FOR THEIR ACTIONS,
AND WE SEE A MAJOR MILITARY
ESCALATION OVER THE LAST WEEK.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN YOU SAY
"MILITARY ESCALATION," IS THIS
SIMILAR TO CRIMEA, WHERE YOU
HAVE SORT OF UNMARKED UNIFORMED
TROOPS ROLLING IN, IN TANKS?
>> I'VE SEEN TANKS ON THE
STREETS OF DONETSK.
IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO ASCERTAIN
WHERE THEY CAME FROM PRECISELY.
THE REBELS HAVE NOT TAKEN NEW
GROUND IN MONTHS AND YET THEY
HAVE MORE MILITARY EQUIPMENT
THAN THEY DID WHEN THE CEASE-
FIRE WAS SIGNED-- AT LEAST
IMPRESSIONISTICALLY, FROM WHAT I
SEE.
NOW, THE DONETSK PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC CLAIMS TO BE OPERATING
INDEPENDENTLY OF RUSSIA.
AND THE ASSERTION HERE IS THAT
ANY RUSSIAN WHO'S FIGHTING IN
EASTERN UKRAINE IS DOING SO
AS AN INDIVIDUAL, AS A
VOLUNTEER, MAYBE EVEN ON
VACATION, BUT CERTAINLY NOT AS
AN ACTIVE MEMBER OF THE RUSSIAN
ARMY.
THERE'S BEEN A VERY AGGRESSIVE
STANCE ON BOTH SIDES, REALLY.
THERE'S BEEN SHELLING FROM THE
UKRAINIAN SIDE INTO THE CITY OF
DONETSK.
A BUS STOP WAS HIT RECENTLY WITH
TRAGIC CONSEQUENCES.
GOING THE OTHER WAY, THERE'S
BEEN SHELLING FROM THE REBEL
SIDE IN UKRAINE-HELD AREAS.
TODAY, OF COURSE, THERE WAS THIS
DISASTROUS SHELLING IN THE CITY
OF MARIUPOL.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, THIS HAS
BEEN ONE OF THE LEAST-EFFECTIVE
CEASE-FIRES IN RECENT HISTORY.
THE U.N. ESTIMATES MORE THAN
1,000 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED
AFTER IT WAS SIGNED.
AND NOW, ARE THESE REBEL FORCES
EMBOLDENED BY THE FACT THEY HAVE
THIS MILITARY SUPPORT COMING IN
FROM RUSSIA?
>> I THINK THAT'S THE CASE.
WITHOUT THE RUSSIAN BACKING, THE
SEPARATIST MOVEMENTS WOULD HAVE
CRUMBLED OR STRUCK A DEAL LONG
AGO.
NOW, THEY SAY THEY WANT TO
EXPAND THEIR BOUNDARIES AND
ULTIMATELY ACHIEVE A MORE
SUSTAINABLE MINI-STATELET HERE
IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT ABOUT
THE LEVERAGE THAT THE WEST HAS?
I MEAN, WE'VE HAD... THE
SANCTIONS HAVE BEEN IN EFFECT.
IT'S SQUEEZED RUSSIA'S ECONOMY.
THE PRICE OF OIL HAS TUMBLED.
WE DON'T REALLY HAVE ANY MORE
LEVERS TO PULL.
>> THERE COULD BE ADDITIONAL
SANCTIONS.
THAT SEEMS UNLIKELY GIVEN THE
SANCTION FATIGUE IN EUROPE.
OTHER THAN THAT, THERE'S ONLY
HAND-WRINGING.
MOST WESTERN GOVERNMENTS HAVE
SAID THEY WILL NOT JOIN THIS
FIGHT MILITARILY, GIVEN RUSSIA'S
GEO-STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE AND
NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
AND AT THIS POINT, THERE ARE NOT
A LOT OF BRAKES ON THE REBEL
MOVEMENT HERE IN EASTERN
UKRAINE.
WE HAVE ATTACKS ON THE DONETSK
AIRPORT; ON THE CITY OF
MARIUPOL; AND, NORTH OF DONETSK,
ON A RAILROAD AND ROAD HUB THAT
IS VERY VULNERABLE AT THIS
POINT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ANDREW KRAMER, JOINING US VIA
SKYPE FROM THE REGIONAL CAPITOL
OF DONETSK FROM UKRAINE.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU, YOUR COMMENTS
ABOUT OUR RECENT WORK.
TONIGHT, SOME OF WHAT YOU HAD TO
SAY ABOUT LAST SATURDAY'S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT FROM BELGIUM
DESCRIBING THAT COUNTRY'S
EUTHANASIA LAWS, THE LEAST
RESTRICTIVE IN THE WORLD.
ONE VIEWER SAID: "I'VE SEEN
PATIENTS GET GREAT COMFORT OUT
OF SIMPLY KNOWING THEY HAVE THE
CHOICE TO END THEIR SUFFERING.
I AM, HOWEVER, SOMEWHAT DUBIOUS
ABOUT USING EUTHANASIA ON
PSYCHIATRIC PATIENTS.
NOT BECAUSE I DOUBT THEIR
SUFFERING, BUT BECAUSE I DOUBT
THEIR MENTAL COMPETENCY TO MAKE
A LIFE ALTERING DECISION."
HANA SHEALA ADDED: "I LIVE WITH
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AND I HOPE
EUTHANASIA WILL NOT BE LEGAL,
THAT THERE ALWAYS ARE
ALTERNATIVES FOR BEING SELF
DETERMINED EVEN AS A VENTED
FUNCTIONAL QUADRIPLEGIC."
THERE WAS THIS FROM LSTCARESS:
"AFTER SUFFERING FROM SEVERE
DEPRESSION FOR 30 YEARS AND
GROWING TIRED OF BEING A DRUGGED
ZOMBIE, I'M APPALLED I'M NOT
ALLOWED THIS OPTION."
AND FROM MICHELLE A. MEAD: "MY
MOTHER AND MY CAT WERE BOTH
DYING AT THE SAME TIME.
ONE OF THEM WAS ALLOWED TO DIE
WITH DIGNITY.
IT WAS NOT MY MOTHER."
OTHERS COMMENTED ABOUT THE
PROVISION IN THE BELGIAN LAW
THAT ALLOWS FOR TERMINALLY ILL
CHILDREN TO CHOOSE EUTHANASIA
WITH THEIR PARENTS' CONSENT.
BRIEE DELLA ROCCA ADDED: "I WISH
WE HAD THIS IN THE STATES.
EVERYONE, EVEN CHILDREN, SHOULD
BE ALLOWED TO FREE THEMSELVES
FROM UNENDING PAIN AND TERMINAL
CONDITIONS WHERE TREATMENT IS
ONLY TORTURE."
BETH DEROOS SAID: "PUTTING AN
INNOCENT CHILD TO DEATH BECAUSE
MEDICAL 'PROFESSIONALS' OR
PARENTS FEEL IT'S BEST?
SORRY, BUT ACTUALLY EXECUTING A
CHILD-- WHICH IS WHAT THIS IS--
IS JUST SO WRONG."
AND FINALLY, THERE WAS THIS,
FROM HILLERY GEELON: "UNLESS
YOU'RE EVER IN THAT SITUATION,
NO ONE WOULD EVER BE ABLE TO
JUDGE."
AS ALWAYS, WE WELCOME YOUR
FEEDBACK AT
www.pbs.org/newshour, OR
ON OUR FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET
US @NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS STRONGLY
CONDEMNED THE BEHEADING OF ONE
OF TWO JAPANESE HOSTAGES HELD BY
ISIS IN SYRIA.
KIA IS RECALLING 87,000 OF ITS
2014 FORTE SEDANS.
THE COMPANY WARNS THAT THE
COOLING FAN RESISTOR MIGHT
OVERHEAT AND MELT, INCREASING
THE RISK OF FIRE.
AND PARTS OF ATLANTA'S
HARTSFIELD-JACKSON INTERNATIONAL
AIRPORT WERE CLOSED TODAY AFTER
CREDIBLE BOMB THREATS WERE MADE
AGAINST TWO INBOUND PASSENGER
JETS.
BOTH PLANES LANDED SAFELY AFTER
BEING ESCORTED BY FIGHTER JETS.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.